=head1 NAME

XML::LibXML::Element - The DOM Element Class

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use XML::LibXML::Element;

  $node = XML::LibXML::Element->new( $name )
  $node->setAttribute( $aname, $avalue );
  $avalue = $node->getAttribute( $aname );
  $node->removeAttribute( $aname );
  @nodes = $node->getElementsByTagName($tagname);
  $node->appendWellBalancedChunk( $chunk )
  $node->appendTextNode( $PCDATA )

=head1 DESCRIPTION



=head2 Methods

=over 4

=item B<new>

This function creates a new node unbound to any DOM.

=item B<setAttribute>

This method sets or replaces the node's attribute I<$aname> to the value I<$avalue>

=item B<getAttribute>

If I<$node> has an attribute with the name I<$aname> ,
the value of this attribute will get returned.

=item B<removeAttribute>

The method removes the attribute I<$aname> from the node's
attribute list, if the attribute can be found.

=item B<getElementsByTagName>

The function gives direct access to all childnodes of the current node with the same tagname. It makes things a lot easier if you need to handle big datasets.

=item B<appendWellBalancedChunk>

Sometimes it is nessecary to append a string coded XML Tree to a node. B<appendWellBalancedChunk> will do the trick for you.
But this is only done if the String is I<well-balanced> .

=item B<appendTextNode>

This wrapper function lets you add a string directly to an element
node.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

XML::LibXML, XML::LibXML::Node, XML::LibXML::Document, XML::LibXML::Text, XML::LibXML::Comment

=head1 VERSION

0.90_a

